Okay, with you, we're on the record.
You don't mind talking into it.
You're the third Nobel laureate I've interviewed in the last year.
Nadine Gordimer here at Harvard, and Ken Zuboura away a few months ago, and yourself.
And I don't say this to gloat about my access to wonderful art.
But the point is, the reason I bring this up,
that each of them, each of these people, has expressed a sense of what the Nobel means, I mean, the responsibility and the obligations.
Do you feel any kind of sense that you're carrying some kind of baggage because of this?
No, simply there are more pressures than before, that's all.
I'm sorry, what?
There are more pressures than before.
I understand.
Obligations?
No.
Whatever I wanted to do before, I try to do now.
I teach, I write, I don't change my life.
The only thing is there are more invitations and more pressures.
That's almost the negative part of it.
The good part is that if you want to make a statement, then you can.
I'm thinking specifically of the Wittberg, of course.
Wittberg, that was before the Nobel.
That was before the Nobel?
Yeah, before the Nobel.
Really, okay.
A year before, a year and a half before.
And it was very close, right there.
A year and a half before.
It was April 85.
Nobel was told when he learned it is serious.
Yes, but still, if a Nobel laureate takes himself too seriously because of Nobel, then he's in trouble.
But it certainly does allow you to be heard, I think, in a much... Sure.
If you make a statement, the microphones are here.
You say very early on in the memoir, and I'm interested in why you chose to do a memoir as opposed to an autobiography, and I wonder if there's a difference in your view.
Yes, autobiography is much more horizontal, which means linear, and the idea is events.
You give the events, 1928, and so forth and so forth.
Memoirs, I think, reaches a greater depth.
You go deeper in you in order to find the words for the memoir.
Autobiography, it's like today you have so many autobiographies written here in America, the ghostwriters, and the whole thing is silly.
How can a ghostwriter write an autobiography of somebody else?
But he wouldn't write a memoir.
And you also said very early, this is not the story of my life, but stories.
That's right.
And I wonder if you could explain what you mean by that.
Precisely.
The memoir, these stories, autobiographies,
But I wonder if it also bears on your sense of storytelling.
I want to get into your sense of the power of fiction, too, in the novel.
I love storytelling.
I love stories.
I grew up in stories as a Hasid, as a student, always as a grandfather.
I think that the culture today,
It should be a culture of telling tales.
Otherwise, we go to dry areas, to dry silence.
And storytelling is different.
It brings back ancient, ancient.
But it also gives you more freedom, doesn't it?
I remember when I did an interview with Ilya Kazan on the occasion of his autobiography, and he said, when you write about yourself,
You lay yourself naked before the world.
You do that, you expose yourself.
And are you fearful about, not fearful, but apprehensive, I guess, is a better word.
No, I forget my age.
My age.
I've written almost 40 books.
This is who I am.
I don't do that, but this is who I am.
I read in one of your interviews that you indicated that had you been rejected on your first effort, you might never have been a writer.
Is that true?
Yes, I'm a publisher.
I cannot take rejections.
Even today?
Even today.
I cannot.
That's why I don't ask.
I don't ask for favors.
I don't ask.
I cannot take rejections.
And therefore, if I had failed totally, I would have probably...
It's written a lot, not a drawer.
I just, having read a number of your books, I just feel that you don't feel that you were a born writer, for quotation marks around that.
I mean, if your purpose... I don't know what it means, a born writer.
I wrote when I had to read it when I was a child.
I wrote a commentary on the Bible, a full commentary, which I found when I came back once, 20 years later.
It's holiday.
I'm embarrassed to speak a lot.
But my vocation was to write down my ideas.
When you're writing fiction, is your goal to tell stories or to probe the deeper truths?
The deeper truths.
Even when I tell tales, the goal of the tales is to find a deeper area.
And where you have, where events have forced themselves upon you, where you have become a witness
and given testimony, you find that you can do this effectively through the novel.
I don't know if you can explain that.
There are certain topics that can be approached only... I'll check myself.
Certain topics can be approached only in the form of novel.
Others only as essays or as plays.
For instance, my play Zalman couldn't
anything but a play.
The Forgotten, the Davis novel, couldn't be anything but a novel.
So, and I feel comfortable in that mode.
But where you have written, as you say, close to 40 books now?
And do you see it all as one, as a corpus?
Oh, yes, absolutely.
And all are various?
Absolutely.
These 40 include a few books of conversations that, you know, people have with me.
And even then, somehow they fit.
going back to Nadine Gordimer, she indicated that I asked her a similar question.
And she said, you know, she gave me the metaphor of going into a gallery and seeing a piece of sculpture.
And she felt that her job as a writer was to kind of look at the, every book was a different view of, and suggesting that maybe there's one big story here.
And that every book, every work has a different aspect to it.
And I wonder if you
I feel the same way, but I do actually the same, almost like all the same characters of most of them, the same books, except in one novel, one character is a spotlight, the other one, somebody else, one idea, other idea, but it's all one universe.
And of course, we talk about, we talk about truth, it's with the capital T, of course.
But you never name it, you know, it sounds bombastic, you know.
You don't mind my jumping around a little bit?
Go ahead.
We'll make order it all.
I know.
Okay.
Early on in the book, you said your pursuit of nocturnal trains ever since the lighting of the night.
I wonder if you could elaborate a little bit on that, what you mean by that?
Because I remember when you were on the trains crisscrossing and going through Europe from my little town to Auschwitz.
trains, with sealed cars, cattle cars, you see, cattle cars, with little openings in the doors.
That has been an obsession for me.
But you said ever since then, also?
Ever since.
Ever since then.
Wondering?
The whole world knew where they were going.
So this is a metaphor.
This is a metaphor.
It's a metaphor, but also real.
But, you know, you say also that very same page.
that you say the world didn't care whether Jews lived or died.
That's quite a strong indictment against the free world.
But it is true.
Look, the free world then was engaged in a glorious, noble war.
Roosevelt and Churchill were involved in something very beautiful to fight Hitler.
They mobilized tens of millions of people, sending them to the front to battle to fight Hitler.
But the parallel war, the war against Jews, was ignored.
And you say, also, you have asked, why didn't you bomb the tracks?
Have you never been given a satisfactory answer?
Never.
I asked everybody, the British and the American, Russian generals.
I asked them now.
But this is, to me, a very important question.
Because Hungarian Jews could have been saved.
They were the last.
They were the last transport
The first transport of these Jews went out the second part of May, almost before D-Day.
And look, they couldn't be saved.
800,000, 600,000, 600,000 people in six weeks were gas.
And you think they knew very early on.
There's a wonderful book, Why Did the Sky Is Not Darken?
And there is a book, one of the earliest, called Arthur Morse.
A lot of people called it, Why Six Million Jews Die.
Amazing.
Yeah.
Do you have, I wonder if this book, if it's just coincidental, but as we approach the end of the century and the millennium, do you have any, and you also say that a memoir is kind of a balance sheet.
Look, this century will not remain in history as all the best.
We had two totalitarian movements that ceased out and caused the death of how many, 60 million kids?
I think a number, as they say, is 60 million kids.
Then we had the cursed progress of handling death.
Never before had there been factories producing death.
Efficiently and systematically?
And efficiently, cold-bloodedly, like producing matches.
Sausages or whatever.
Then you had, for the first time, a human being reduced to numbers, to objects.
Even the worst part would kill this human being, savagely, Genghis Khan.
But for the first time, it is a human being,
So you described that scene that you learned many years later about your uncle Mendel, I guess, and his son.
So the balance sheet is not very, very good.
At the same time, at the end now, well, the book ends in 69, but today I try to find some hope for my students after all.
Some good things happened now, the fall of communism, the end of apartheid.
also the breakup of these communist lands.
Good things, and peace between Israel and America.
Things are happening.
You choose for your title, of course, a fragment from Ecclesiastes, which you also use in the epigraph.
And I think you've been quoted as saying, Ecclesiastes is generally
the most pessimistic.
I wonder if you could explain, is there a paradox here?
Of course, even that is a paradox.
But I love the Ecclesiastes, the Afrolists there are very, very depressing and beautiful.
And I took it because of this.
But I want to say this, in general, the best titles are in the Bible.
Oh, really?
When writers or editors or publishers need a good title, they should
Or Shakespeare is a good, strong section.
Shakespeare's not a bad section.
And so the fact here is that, except I want to say, all the rivers flowing down into the sea.
The second part is, and the sea is not full.
That's exactly right.
You also say your two favorite words are, and yet.
And yet.
And I wonder if you could ever explain it clearly, but has this always been?
And yet, meaning nothing is absolute.
And I think this is the way you've recorded your life, and the way you visualize, you have explained.
That's right.
I'm angry with God, but God is God.
What can I do?
I can't remain angry with my life.
You remain angry with God?
Occasionally.
We are in a school of theology.
No, we protest.
I protest.
I block my faith.
I didn't lose my faith anymore, but it was wounded.
It was wounded.
And therefore, occasionally, I ask God, why did you do that?
Why don't you let it happen?
But to say only God is responsible is wrong.
You will be interested in it afterwards.
You will be interested in it.
It's too easy to say, God, I believe you.
It's too easy.
Sure.
But when you were questioning, you say your faith was never shaken at all, even in the darkest hours.
Even in the darkest hours.
My faith was there, but my faith, indeed,
what you call the loving kindness of God.
When I was an undergraduate years ago in the 60s, I remember reading a book called From Death Camp to Existentialism.
Are you familiar with that book?
I wish I could remember.
I remember the book, yes.
It was quite a remarkable present 30-odd years ago that I read it.
This was just like 20 years ago.
You talk about those experiences.
Sure.
surreal experiences that lead a person who is otherwise very devout towards an existential level.
Are you familiar with Aaron Lansky at the National Yiddish Book Center?
Have you ever heard of it?
Yeah.
I recommended them for the .
Oh, really?
Yeah.
I write about him.
I have a book out now.
It's called A Gentle Madness.
It's going into his fourth print.
It's about the passion for books over 20 years.
Who is publishing it?
Holt.
And I have a chapter on Lansky and his attempt to preserve this language.
And I'm curious, you can write in the Yiddish.
I have pages about Yiddish in this book.
I glorify Yiddish quite a lot in this book.
And, of course, my epigraph to that section on the Yiddish section, I quote Ivy Singer in his Nobel lecture, where he talks about Yiddish is not a tenth language.
How do you feel about that?
Of course, the Germans and the Russians tried their best to enjoy it.
I love Yiddish.
I love it.
I spoke Yiddish at home.
I used to work for the forwards.
I wrote Yiddish as I write here.
That was quite a statement that Singer made, though.
He insisted on writing in Yiddish, didn't he, to the end?
Yeah, he was old, and also he did very well.
But he spoke English, right?
Well, English, and he didn't know English.
But he loved English.
He grew up in Yiddish, and furthermore, he felt that it's good.
But it was always the language of the vernacular.
It just took so long for it to be recognized as a literary guy.
19th century.
Now, you feel more comfortable writing in French, I guess.
Only in French.
Comfortable only in French.
But, I mean, your English is perfect.
Do you think in French?
I mean, obviously, you're thinking in English now.
Now, but when I teach, I teach in English, but when I write, I only write in French.
But in French?
In French, yes.
Your wife, does she translate here?
Usually, she translates my book.
This one, she simply worked on a translation done by someone else.
Uh-huh.
Do you feel when somebody else is translating that you want to?
Not with my wife.
I want to, I want peace at home.
I think it's a good idea.
I've talked to so many people, even like Stratis Javieris, across the way that when his first book was, he wrote it in Greek and somebody translated it into English.
I want peace at home.
That's a wonderful book.
I find also, because you have so many years as a journalist, that there is almost a journalistic
There's certain parts.
But then you have these monologues.
Of course, that's a device.
That's a stylistic device that you might explain a little bit about.
I mean, because there certainly are literary touches here.
I consider this a literary work.
Yes.
I'm terribly sorry.
I wouldn't interrupt you, but it is a way... My watch.
Stay where you are.
Hello.
And I do read them.
Which is there.
which is the most important thing.
So it seems foolish to me to ask you questions of things that you already explained quite fully and most poignantly in the book itself.
I won't take up too much of your time, because I know how busy you are.
But you have indicated that at some point there is a story to be told about what some Jews did to other Jews,
and at this time still perhaps isn't right for that.
Not yet.
I have a black book like that, which I keep talking about.
Truly a black book?
Not now.
I have to go, and there will be instructions when to publish them.
Really?
And is this also an element of bearing witness?
It has to be done.
I think whatever I try to do, even if I write about the Bible, I write about Talmud, and all kinds of things.
For me, writing is very difficult.
So tell me about the experience of covering the Eichmann trial.
I mean, that must have been.
Naturally, it was the man who came to my town.
He and another German officer, they came to supervise the crowning glory of his operation.
And I remember when I used to look at him for hours.
I didn't want him to remove my eyes.
Hoping to find something that should explain the evil of this man, how his human being can become evil.
Hoping to find the monstrous aspect to his personal personality.
Two noses, 40 years, things like that.
Fade well, slept well.
Had a good system of the films.
So you never, it never came to you.
You know, you were saying earlier, how is humanity capable of this?
And you think of the Germans, you think of the rebels.
Because Dr. Goebbels, he had a PhD.
One of my darkest days from when I discovered so many, many years ago that most of the commanding officers of the Einsatzgruppen for the world in murder squads, in Eastern Europe, in Russia, had PhDs.
PhDs in the arts, in theology, in philosophy, in ethics.
and they were doing the killing of machine guns.
One and a half reason Jews were killed like that.
So when you teach, do you say to students, education is important, but humanity is also an element that goes... I say education is not the only shield.
You need something else.
You need some ethical dimensions to that question.
I don't want to take up too much of your time, because I know I can see how I just don't want to miss anything here.
Chris, what is there to say about the Rabin situation in Israel?
You know, I went to the funeral.
I went to Clinton on his plane.
And I went with broken heart.
I came back broken heart.
Because I knew him well.
He was very cross-francy.
Since 1967, it became very interesting.
I've seen him in New York 10 days before I saw this in Washington.
And I introduced him.
He wanted to be the one to introduce him to a shop I didn't know somewhere.
I saw him next day.
After a show, I went to see him nearby.
And we spoke about Boston.
He was terribly disturbed by the hatred
And to take anything away from this?
I mean, is it just madness like everything else?
No, it's hatred.
It's hatred.
And what disturbs us all, I mean, when we think of who blew up
It would have been so easy to blame the Arab experiencers during the federal building in Oklahoma, but it was Americans, wasn't it?
And these are experiencers.
And there's a hotline in New York City as for a defense for this guy.
The obscenity of all that.
There was a rabbi that was on.
I couldn't believe it.
The obscenity of all that.
I was watching this with my wife.
I could shut that man off.
I was yelling at the television.
But they are doing to God, really.
Poor God.
They pick him an accomplice.
They may call him an accomplice.
That's right.
Well, God says you can kill the enemy if the enemy is defined.
They may call him an accomplice.
Are you fearful, or do you think that the country will... I'm fearful.
I'm worried about that.
I mean, do you think Perez has it?
He will have to.
He's not Rabin, but he will have to.
He will help him.
The book that Holt published two years ago was my editor.
It was the same editor of that book who spent time in Israel with...
I really think I have plenty, and I wonder if you'd kindly inscribe a copy of my... Of course.
Just one quick question.
You say, at the very beginning of the book, that you dream of your father all the time, but now you realize you never knew him.
I knew him only in the camp.
He was so busy helping the community.
But your dreams, are you still haunted?
Would you say your dreams, you're haunted by your dreams, or do they help you?
More and more.
Somehow, I think, I'm not the only one, I think.
Many survivors dream more about those years than before.
And are they clear?
Are they real dreams?
Sometimes, yes, sometimes.
In my case, sometimes they're very clear.
Other times, yeah.
I would like to go on the surface.